# HF
Head loss in pipes
The head loss in pipes has been extensively studied and its precise calculation is of great importance in hydraulic projects. In the design and analysis of piping, the three major pipe-flow problems are the determination of pipe diameter, flow rate and head loss for a given set of known variables. The pressure loss due to friction of a liquid flowing in a pipe is usually calculated by the Darcy-Weisbach equation. The friction factor (f) depends on the Reynolds number (Re) and the relative roughness (ε / D) of the tube. For laminar flow (Re <2000), the friction factor is easily calculated by a linear relationship with the Reynolds number. For turbulent flow, the friction factor can be determined by the Colebrook-White equation. However, the solution of this equation requires the use of iterative methods. Alternatively, explicit equations can be used for calculating friction factor. There are also found a variety of empirical equations. This paper presents an R package for calculating the pressure drop in pipelines. Three functions have been implemented covering the three major cases: pressure drop calculation (headLoss function), flow rate or speed calculation (flowrate function) and diameter calculation (Diameter function). All problems can be solved with the various equations implemented (Colebrook-White, Swamee-Jain, Blasius, Hazen-Williams, Flamant, among others). The results are presented in a friendly way and with the possibility to use them directly in other applications. The package is available for free under the GPL 3 license - General Public License version 3.
